Chess is a turn-based game played on an 8 by 8 board, by two players — black and white — that each control 16 figures. Of these 16 figures 8 are pawns and there are 2 knights, bishops and rooks each, one queen and most importantly one king. The figures have different movement patterns, and may be moved to any square that isn’t occupied (or *blocked*) by a friendly piece, during a players turn. If an enemy piece occupies a square, moving a friendly figure on it will remove the opponent’s piece from the game. If on the next turn a player can move one of their pieces on a square that is occupied by an opponent piece (and thusly removing it), we say that their piece is *attacking* the opponent piece. The action of removing an opponent piece by placing one’s own piece on the square that it’s occupying is called *capturing* the opponent piece.
Let us first discuss the king’s movement patterns to understand how a game of chess is won (or lost). The king may be moved to any one of its adjacent 8 squares, and is *in check* if one of the opponent pieces is attacking it. If the king is in check, the player is *forced* to defend it. (The king may never be captured.) This can be done (depending on the specific threat) by either moving the king on a safe square, removing the attacking piece or blocking the attack with a friendly piece. If, however, a check cannot be defended (i.e. there are no safe squares for the king and no ways of removing or blocking the attacking piece(s)), the king is *checkmated* and the game is over. The player whose king was checkmated has lost.
The aim of the game, therefore, is using one’s pieces to checkmate the opponent, while not getting checkmated oneself.
So two immediate candidates for a reward function are:
1. A very large reward for checkmating the opponent 
2. A very large penalty for getting checkmated oneself
Since the entire aim of the game is dependent on it.
A fairly immediate and slight extension of these rewards involves the concept of *forced checkmates*. These describe a series of moves, in which a player is forced to make moves that eventually end up in them getting checkmated (usually accomplished by a succession of checks). In many positions, these can be calculated quite effectively, and always present a guaranteed winning strategy. Therefore we introduce:
3. A very large reward for finding a forced checkmate (and playing moves that are in line with it)
4. A very large penalty for allowing the opponent a forced checkmate
Now for the other pieces. They move as follows:
- The rook can move across the board horizontally or vertically until it reaches a blocked square or an enemy figure. It may be placed on any square before these, or capture the opponent piece. (It may not, however, be placed on squares that come after.)
- The bishop’s moves similarly to to the rook. The key difference is that the bishop moves diagonally across the squares. Everything else stays exactly the same.
- The queen can move like a rook and a bishop combined — i.e. it can move both horizontally and vertically.
- The knight is the only piece that can “jump” over other pieces. It  can move to any square that is unblocked, and reachable by moving the knight two squares vertically/horizontally and one square horizontally/vertically. If all of these squares are unblocked, the knight can therefore reach 8 squares.
- Lastly, the pawn may move one square ahead (i.e. vertically towards the opponent’s end of the board.) However, it may only capture *diagonally* toward’s the opponent’s side of the board. (It is the only piece where movement and capturing patterns do not coincide.) Lastly, it may move two squares forward, if it is moving from its initial position in the second rank (white) or seventh rank(black). 
- There is also castling (something akin to switching the rook’s and king’s position), capturing en passant(capturing a pawn that has moved horizontally next to a friendly pawn on the previous move) and promotion, which allows to trade in a pawn for any piece (except for king), if one has moved it on the last rank
From this we can propose a value hierarchy for the pieces. 
The queen is obviously more valuable than a bishop or rook, since it combines their movement patterns. Aside from this, the value of an individual piece is quite dependent upon the specific board position. There is, however, a generally employed heuristic system of measuring any given piece’s value, using points. 
- The king’s value is infinite, since it may never be captured
- The queen’s value is 9
- The rook’s value is 5
- The bishop’s and knight’s value is 3
- The pawn’s value is 1
This could be employed as a general heuristic, however for truly adaptive play, the value of a given piece needs to be evaluated based on the position at hand. One could attempt to reward some other general rules of thumb, such as playing towards the center of the board, developing pieces early, etc. but this probably defeats the purpose of employing a reinforcement learning approach.
So let us now finish the formalisation of chess as an MDP.
- The state space $S$ consists of the 8 by 8 grid, that can hold any one of the 12 kinds of pieces (pawn, knight, bishop, rook, queen king — each either black or white) or be empty. So 13 possible states for each of the 64 squares. Of course, only a subset of these states is *legal* i.e. reachable by following the rules. In none of these positions can a player have a piece attacking the king *and* have the turn. Aside from this constraint one cannot have white pawns on the first rank and black pawns on the last rank. Lastly, there can be a maximum of 9 queens, 8 pawns, and 10 rooks, knights and bishops respectively, per color (since there are only 8 pawns that could possibly be promoted). The subset of states that respects these constraints is the State space.
- The action space $A$ consists of every legal move in a position. That is all the squares that a friendly piece could be placed on (by abiding the movement rules), that produce a legal state. So $A$ changes (deterministically) with respect to $s$ at turn $t$ 
- There are no probabilistic state dynamics. Each action produces a completely certain, deterministic outcome
- The reward dynamics are, aside from (forced) checkmates, relatively undefined